
**What is SAP?**<br>
Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) is the methodology that is used to calculate energy performance of residential buildings in the UK.

**What is SAP used for?**<br>
SAP is mainly used for two purposes:
1. When new buildings are built they must comply with part L of building regulation
2. When existing buildings are sold or rented an Energy Performance Certificate (EPC) must be generated. An EPC is valid for 10 yearsS.

**How does SAP work?**<br>
SAP works off the energy balance principle that energy lost through building fabric are balanced by energy supplied by the heating system, solar and internal gains. The calculation steps are:

1. Calculate overall dwelling dimensions (including fabric, windows and doors) to get important outputs like total floor area and total dwelling volume.
2. Ventilation rate is made up of infiltration (unintentional leakage) and ventilation(intentional air movement).
    - Infiltration: calculated using pressure test or pulse test
	- Ventilation: natural ventilation or mechanical ventilation systems
	- Effective air change rate calculated using infiltration rate and air change rate through mech vent system if present
3. Heat loss
	- Fabric heat loss based on u-values through doors, windows, ground floor, walls and roof.
	- Heat Transfer Coefficient = Ventilation heat loss + Fabric heat loss
4. Water heating requirements
	- Hot water usage in litres is sum of showers, baths and other
	- Distribution loss is 15% of energy content
	- Total water heating = 0.85 * energy content + water storage loss + primary circuit loss+ combi loss + distribution losses
	- Adjust for WWHRS, PV diverter, Solar DHW, FGHRS DHW
	- Output from water heater
5. Internal gains
    - Sum of: metabolic gains from occupants, lighting gains, appliances gains, cooking gains, circulation pumps and ventilation fans, auxiliary losses, heat from water heating storage gains.
6. Solar gains
	- Based on orientation, glazing properties and shading factors.
7. Mean internal temperature where temperature in living room is 21C and rest of house is 18C
	- Adjusted for controls
8. Space heating energy requirement
	- Use mean internal temperature and external temperature and HTC to get heat loss rate
	-  Space heating = 0.024*(Heat loss rate - useful gains)* days in the month. Where 0.024 converts watt-days to kWh.
9.  Total energy requirements
	- Fraction from main 1, main 2 or secondary system
	- Efficiency of space heating
	- Efficiency of water heating
	- Main outputs: space heating, water heating, electrical energy (pumps, fans and lighting)
10. Energy saving/generation technology
	- Electricity used in dwelling generated by PV, wind, hydroelectric
	- Electricity exported generated by PV, wind, hydroelectric
	- SAP 10 has variable beta factors for technologies like PV diverters and battery storage.
11. Multiply by fuel costs, carbon factors and primary energy factors to get SAP rating, DER, DPER


